====
Keen 
====
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Disclaimer: This is a design document, even if it's not written as such. No implementation exists yet.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Keen is a functional programming language heavily inspired by Haskell, but with a number of important differences. To summarize the language:

- It's **pure**, meaning that the language offers compiler guaranteed control over side effects.
- It's **strict**, meaning that arguments are evaluated before application, the same way it works in Java, Standard ML, and most other popular languages.
- It's **polymorphic**, similar to how Java has **generics**, but in a much simpler, much more powerful, **higher-kinded** manner.
- It has **type reconstruction**, meaning that you never have to give an explicit type to variables and functions, except when dealing with the most advanced features of the type system.
- It is **functional** meaning that functions are simply values, and closures are formed by capturing variables within the lexical scope.
- It has **pattern matching** and **algebraic datatypes** meaning that you can easily construct, make decisions on and take apart values.
- It has **type classes**, meaning that you can have structured overloading, such as a ``+`` operator that does what you expect for both integers and floating point numbers. Instances are **first class values** and can be passed around like a record with polymorphic fields.
- It has **user defined operators**, meaning that you can define your own operators. It uses mixfix, allowing you to define operators like ``if a then b else c``. It even supports a form of **optional lazyness**. Indeed, ``if`` is provided in the standard library, and is not built into the language.
- It has **monad comprehensions**, allowing a succinct syntax for a broad range of tasks, such as generating lists, performing side effects, and so on.
- It has a **module system**, with very succinct syntax for importing and exporting symbols.
- It has **macros**, allowing you to write ordinary Keen functions and use them to generate parts of your program.

And that's really all there is to it. There is **no subtyping nor inheritance** to complicate matters. 

The compiler targets **LLVM** and **JavaScript** allowing it to be used both as an efficient native language and within the browser.

It comes with a **package system**, and a global package repository is available. When developping multiple packages, you can choose to tell the package system to always use the latest available local source code for a package, thus avoiding the busywork of having to install every time you make a change in a dependency.

Terms
=====

Importing symbols from a module is easy. Here we import every symbol (using the underscore as a wildcard) from the ``Base`` module::

    import Base (_)

The base module provides a range of standard functionality, such as arithmetic operators, control structures and boolean values.

We can then write a ``Hello, World`` example::

    main = print "Hello, World!"

Note that the entry point of our program must be called ``main``. It must have the type ``IO ()`` meaning that it performs input/output and returns no interesting value.
We can give it an explicit type like this::

    : IO ()
    main = print "Hello, World!"
    
The ``: t`` syntax says that "the following definition has type ``t``". Note that we don't have to give the type; the compiler can figure it out.

As you can see, we don't use parenthesis and commas when applying a function. We simply write the function followed by all of its arguments.
When defining functions, we use a similar syntax::

    increase x = x + 1

This defines a function that returns the successor of a integer. For example, ``increase 5 == 6``. We take ``==`` to mean equality.

If we need multiple arguments, we simply list them::

    max a b = if a > b then a else b

If we like, we can restrict this function to work on ``Ints``::

    : Int -> Int -> Int
    max a b = if a > b then a else b

You can read this as "max takes an ``Int``, and then another ``Int``, and finally produces an ``Int``". 
In fact, what really happens here is **currying**. The arrow ``->`` is right associatve, meaning that the type we wrote down is equivalent to ``Int -> (Int -> Int)``, 
which can be read as "max takes an ``Int``, and then produces a **function**. That function takes another ``Int`` and finally produces an ``Int``".

If you're familiar with lambda calculus, you know the notation ``λx.e``. In JavaScript it's written ``function(x) { return e; }`` and in Python it's written ``lambda(x): e``.
In Keen, since lambda functions are so common, we adobt the Haskell notation which is about as short as the original: ``\x -> e``.

The definition of ``max`` above is actually syntactic sugar for the following (parenthesis added)::

    max = (\a -> (\b -> (if a > b then a else b)))

Note what happens when we apply ``max`` to a single argument ``0``, thus substituting ``0`` for ``a``::

        max 0
    =>  (\a -> (\b -> (if a > b then a else b))) 0
    =>  (\b -> (if 0 > b then 0 else b)))

As is evident, we end up with a function, which can also be written::

    maxZero b = if 0 > b then 0 else b

Or equivalently::
    
    maxZero b = max 0 b

Or even::

    maxZero = max 0

You can return multiple results by using a **tuple**, written ``(e1, e2)``::

    minMax a b = (min a b, max a b)

We can use pattern matching in a local binding to get the values out of the tuple::

    absoluteDifference a b = {
        (minimum, maximum) = minMax a b
        maximum - minimum
    }

Tuples can contain a fixed number of elements with different types. 
Another useful data structure is the list, which can contain any number of elements of the same type::

    numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]

You may use comprehensions to generate lists, for example::

    squaredNumbers = {
        n <- numbers
        guard (n >= 3)
        return (n * n)
    }
    
    squaredNumbers == [9, 16, 25]

You can read the comprehension like this, line by line:

- For each ``n`` in ``numbers``
- where ``n >= 3``
- generate an element ``n * n``

You can have any number of ``<-`` that you want. For example, say you wanted to generate a truth table for logical ``and``::

    andTable = {
        x <- [False, True]
        y <- [False, True]
        return (x, y, x and y)
    }
    
    andTable == [
        (False, False, False),
        (False, True,  False),
        (True,  False, False),
        (True,  True,  True)
    ]

Data types
==========

You can define your own data types. For starters, here's how the ``Bool`` data type is specified in the standard library::

    data Bool {
        True
        False
    }

You may compare this to the ``enum`` keyword from Java or a similar language. 
It allows you to list a number of **tags**, and instances of the type (eg. ``Bool``) has exactly one tag (eg. ``True`` or ``False``).
You can pattern match on these values::

    choose a b c = switch a \{
        True -> b
        False -> c
    }

This may look a little bit like the Java ``switch`` keyword, but ``switch`` is simply a function defined as::

    switch x f = f x

All the magic lies in the pattern matching lambda syntax ``\{ ... }``. 
Each case is signified by an arrow ``->`` leading from the pattern to the expression that is to be evaluated if the pattern matches.
With the definition above, we have::

    choose True b c == b
    choose False b c == c

Note that we never required anything of ``b`` and ``c``. 
In fact, they could have any type and the function would still work.
We thus have a **polymorphic** function, in the sense that it works for multiple types. 
We can write this type down explicitly using lower case identifiers for such type variables::

    choose : Bool -> t -> t -> t

Note that we have stated that the type of ``b`` and ``c`` should be equal, since the function would otherwise return different types depending on whether or not ``a`` was true or false, which we can't always know at compile time.

The ``choose`` function is similar to ``if a then b else c``, except that the syntax is different and that all the arguments are always evaluated, regardless of the condition. 
We will return to define the actual ``if a then b else c`` with appropriate syntax, semantcs and type later.

The construct does much more than simply enabling enumerations, since each tag can have arguments. 
For example, here's simplified definition of (non-empty) ``String`` from the standard library::

    data String {
        Single Char
        Concat String String
    }
    
This says that a ``String`` is either a ``Single Char``, or a ``Concat`` of two ``Strings``. 
You can take the string syntax::

    foo = "Foo"

To mean::

    foo = Concat (Character 'F') (Concat (Character 'o') (Character 'o'))

And the string concatenation operator can be taken to mean::

    a ++ b = Concat a b

Then we can implement ``size``::

    size = \{
        Single _ -> 1
        Concat s1 s2 -> size s1 + size s2
    }

We use the underscore as a wildcard here, since we don't need to know the actual character.
If we wanted to only match a specific character, eg. 'c', we could write ``Single 'c'`` instead, though it wouldn't make much sense in this example.

Note that the actual ``String`` implementation is a bit more clever, and both ``++`` and ``size`` are constant time operations, and everything else is at most linear time in the size of the string.

As in most functional languages, there is no such thing as Java's ``null`` in Keen. 
Instead, when a value may be absent, we use the ``Maybe`` type, which is either just a value or nothing.
For ``Bool`` we could define it as::

    data Maybe {
        Just Bool
        Nothing
    }

Then we could write code like::

    parseBool = \{
        "True" -> Just True
        "False" -> Just False
        _ -> Nothing
    }

    parseBool "True" == Just True
    parseBool "False" == Just False
    parseBool "quux" == Nothing

However, then we'd probably also want a ``Maybe`` for ``String``, ``Float`` and so on.
Luckily, type constructors can be polymorphic, so we can define all of these once and for all::

    data Maybe a {
        Just a
        Nothing
    }

Before ``parseBool`` would have the type ``String -> Maybe``, but with this definition it has the type ``String -> Maybe Bool``.
We can also write functions that work for all ``Maybe a`` types::

    default d m = switch m \{
        Just v -> v
        Nothing -> d
    }

    default 7 Nothing == 7
    default 7 (Just 2) == 2

Note how we captured the value from ``Just`` into the ``v`` variable.

Operators
=========

You can define new operators by using the ``operator`` keyword::

    operator _!=_
    
This introduces the ordinary symbol ``_!=_`` and the binary infix operator ``!=``.
The underscores mark operand positions.
We must then define the operator::

    a != b = not (a == b)

Or equivalently::

    _!=_ a b = not (a == b)

Operators enable delaying evaluation of the operands, by using double underscores instead of single underscores.
Consider the logical ``and`` operator; in most languages, the second argument is evaluated only when the first argument is ``True``.
We can achieve this by marking the second operand as delayed::

    operator _and__
    
This simply means that whenever the ``and`` operator is used, the second operand will be delayed by wrapping it into a lambda function.
Thus we have the following::

    x and y == _and__ x (\() -> y)

The right hand side is complicated due to the explicit delaying ``(\() -> y)`` which is implicit on the left hand side.

We can define the short circuiting logical ``and`` as::

    x and y = switch x \{
        True -> y ()
        False -> False
    }

With this in place, we can define the ``if`` statement with familiar syntax and semantics::

    operator if_then__else__

Note that the second and third operands are delayed.
Hence the definition::
    
    if a then b else c = switch a \{
        True -> b ()
        False -> c ()
    }
    
We can use it in expressions::

    max a b = if (a >= b) then a else b

The parenthesis are a perhaps superfluous, and we can eliminate them by specifying precedence::

    operator if_then__else__ {
        < _>=_ _+_
    }
    
This means "the ``if_then__else__`` operator has lower precedence than the ``_>=_`` and the ``_+_`` operator".
Similarly, you may use ``=`` and ``>`` to indicate identical or higher precedence respectively.
You can now write the example without parenthesis::

    max a b = if a >= b then a else b

Left associative and right associative operators are introduced with ``operatorleft`` and ``operatorright`` respectively.

Type classes and implicit arguments
===================================

You can define a class as follows::

    class Show a {
        show : a -> String
    }

This defines the ``Show`` class with one type parameter. We use this class to convert values to strings, like ``.toString()`` in Java.
We can make an instance for showing ``Bool`` values as follows::

    showBool = object Show Bool {
        show = \{
            True -> "True"
            False -> "False"
        }
    }

We may then use the methods of the class as follows::
    
    : Show a -> a -> IO ()
    print showInstance v = putStrLn (showInstance.show v)

If we then want to print out a ``Bool`` value, we can write::

    main = print showBool True
    
This would print "True" to the console and exit.
We can also define an **implicit instance** as follows::

    object Show Bool {
        show = \{
            True -> "True"
            False -> "False"
        }
    }

And we can define ``print`` differently so that it takes an implicit instance of ``Show`` instead::

    : {Show a} a -> IO ()
    print v = putStrLn (show v)

Note how we use the ``show`` method without specifying the instance, since it'll be resolved automatically.
This means we can use ``print`` without explicitly supplying a ``Show`` instance::

    main = print True
    
The type system will see that the type variable ``a`` is instantiated to ``Bool``, and thus look for the implicit instance ``Show Bool``.
If it can't find any, or there are multiple implicit instances that fit equally well, it'll complain.

The type parameters can be higher kinded. A kind is a "type of type". For example, we saw ``Maybe a`` before.
``Maybe`` is a type constructor that expects one parameter, which we can write like this::

    Maybe : _ -> _
    
The underscores mean "any type". 
In other words, ``Maybe`` is a type constructor that when applied to a single type parameter returns a type.

This is useful when defining type classes::

    class Monad m {
        return : a -> m a
        _>>=_  : m a -> (a -> m b) -> m b
    }
    
Note that ``m`` here has the kind ``_ -> _``, which is evident from the fact that it's applied to type parameters in the method types.
Note also that the methods are **polymorphic** in ``a`` and ``b``, similar to how Java has generic methods.

The methods can be seen as ordinary functions of the type::

    return : {Monad m} a -> m a
    _>>_   : {Monad m} m a -> (a -> m b) -> m b

Indeed, method names are global. If multiple classes use the same method names, you can access them qualified::

    // Implicit version
    print v = putStrLn (Show.show v)

    // Explicit version
    print showInstance v = putStrLn (showInstance.Show.show v)

While this can be inconvenient at times, it serves to help the type inference engine.

You can supply multiple explicit instances separated by a semicolon before the dot::

    : {Show a, Read a} a -> a
    showRead v = read (show v)

    (myShowInstance; myReadInstance).showRead 42

The search for implicit instances will then prefer the explicitly provided instances. 
Every explicitly provided instance must be used at least once.

Classes may also have implicit parameters::

    class {Bar} Foo {}
    
And these can be supplied when instantiating the class with the following syntax::
    
    myBar.object Foo {}
    
The semicolon syntax before the dot can be used here as well.

You can provide implicit definitions for ordinary datatypes too::

    object Maybe a = Nothing
    
And you can get the value of an implicit instance by using the underscore::

    switch _ \{
        Just v -> print "Something"
        Nothing -> print "Nothing"
    }

In the above example, the underscore is inferred to have the type ``Maybe a``, so it'll find our instance and print ``Nothing``.

Macros
======

A macro is simply a function that takes a string and produces some definitions using the Macro monad::

    derive : String -> Macro ()

Syntactically, a macro is invoked at toplevel using curly braces around the symbol referring to the macro function::

    {derive} Show for Bool

    {html} page =
        <!doctype html>
        <html>
            <head><title>Foo</title></head>
            <body>Bar</body>
        </html>

The string parameter is simply the rest of the line and every following line until the first non-empty non-indented line or the end of the file.

The ``Macro`` monad is an instance of ``MonadIO``, so arbitrary I/O is allowed. 
Special functions are available in the ``Macro`` monad that can mark files as dependencies, so that they will be taken into account when considering what to recompile.

Definitions before a macro invocation cannot refer to definitions after that macro invocation.

All the type information for definitions above a macro is available to that macro.

Modules
=======

Modules in Keen are tied to file names. 
The source code for a module called ``Data.Map`` must reside in a directory called ``Data`` and be called ``Map.keen``, eg:

===================     ========================
Module name             File name (relative)
===================     ========================
Base                    Base.keen
Data.Map                Data/Map.keen
Language.JSON.Macro     Language/JSON/Macro.keen
===================     ========================

Module names and the corresponding file names start with an upper case English letter (a-z) and contain only alphanumeric characters (except for the single dot).

Importing symbols
-----------------

You can import symbols from a module into your namespace, qualified by the module name by using the syntax::

    import Map = Data.Map
    
    numberNames = Map.fromList [ /* ... */ ]

You can also import specific symbols unqualified, like this::

    import Data.Map (fromList)
    
    numberNames = fromList [ /* ... */ ]

Or simply import every symbol unqualified using a wildcard, like this::

    import Data.Map (_)
    
    numberNames = fromList [ /* ... */ ]

Sometimes different modules define symbols of the same name. 
Importing two of these unqualified is an error, unless there is exactly one import statement explicitly mentioning the specific symbol, in which case that import takes precedence.
Definitions in the current module take precedence, but it's an error to explicitly mention a symbol in an import that also has a definition in the current module.

As an example, both ``Data.Map`` and ``Data.Set`` export a symbol named ``fromList``. 
If we need both, we can make sure we get the one from ``Data.Map`` by explicitly mentioning it::

    import Data.Map (fromList, _)
    import Data.Set (_)
    
    numberNames = fromList [ /* ... */ ]

Some definitions such as ``data`` and ``class`` have their own namespace with symbols.
These are imported by the wildcard imports above, but here's how to explicitly mention them::

    import Data.Maybe (Maybe)

The above imports unqualified only the ``Maybe`` type constructor.

::

    import Data.Maybe (Maybe (Just))

The above imports unqualified the ``Maybe`` type constructor and the ``Just`` data constructor, but not ``Nothing``.

::

    import Data.Maybe (Maybe (_))

The above imports unqualified the ``Maybe`` type constructor and all its data constructors.

Even if you don't import all associated symbols, you can still access them qualified::

    import Data.Maybe (Maybe)
    
    nothing = Maybe.Nothing

You can rename individual symbols too::

    import Data.Maybe (Option = Maybe)
    
    nothing = Option.Nothing

Exporting symbols
-----------------

You can export symbols from the current module using almost the same syntax as in the imports, but using the ``export`` keyword and no module name::

    export (increase, Bool (_))
    
    increase x = x + 1
    
    data Bool {
        True
        False
    }

You can also reexport symbols from a different module as if they were defined in your module::

    export Data.Map (Map, fromList)

By default, nothing is exported. Only exported symbols can be imported by other modules.

Syntax
======

The following symbols are special and cannot be redefined::

    import export
    data type class object
    operator operatorleft operatorright
    . = -> <- : \
    // /* */

The last three mark the beginning of a single line comment, the beginning of a multi line comment and the end of a multi line comment respectively. Multi line comments may be nested.

Additionally, following characters are special, but cannot be part of symbols anyway (except for the underscore in operators)::

    { } [ ] ( ) _ , ;

There are three lexical classes of symbols that may be redefined (except as described above):

- Math, consisting of one or more of ``!@#$%&/=+?|^*-.:<>``.
- Lower, consisting of a lowercase English letter (``a``-``z``) followed by any number of English letters and numbers.
- Upper, consisting of an uppercase English letter (``A``-``Z``) followed by any number of English letters and numbers.

Additionally, underscores may (only) be part of operator names as described in the operator section, and a Lower or Upper symbol may end with any number of 's.
Please use "camelCase" when naming operators (that is, uppercase the first letter of every word) and avoid abbreviations.

The first non-empty, non-comment line within a pair of ``{ }`` marks the **indentation level** of that block (if on the same line as the ``{`` there is anything else, the column that starts on is the indentation level).
A semicolon is inserted before any subsequent lines with the same indentation.
Nothing immediately inside the block can be indented less, but continued lines should be indented more.
A semicolon will never be inserted immediately within a pair of ``[ ]`` or ``( )`` or ``" "`` and indentation is ignored within these.
Please use exactly 4 spaces for all kinds of indentation.

A ``Char`` literal is enclosed in a pair of ``' '`` and a ``String`` literal is enclosed in a pair of ``" "``.
In both cases, there are backslash escapes: ``\\ \" \' \r \n \t \xXX \uXXXX \UXXXXXX``. 
The first two become a literal ``"`` and ``'`` respectively.
The next two are the ASCII CR and LF codes respectively. 
The next one is the tabulator character.
The next three are Unicode literals, with 2, 4 and 6 hexadecimal places respectively, as marked by the ``X``'es.
Multiline strings are allowed.

Integer literals consist of one of more of ``0``-``9``. 
Floating point literals consist of an integer literal, and then optionally a ``.`` followed by an integer literal, and then optionally an ``E`` or ``e`` (and optionally a sign ``+`` or ``-``) followed by an integer.

